Now, my theme is
“Guard Against Every Sort of Greed.”
Jehovah lovingly gave counsel
to Jeremiah’s secretary, Baruch,
to stop “seeking great things” for himself.
Now, what were those great things?
Well, we don’t know for sure,
perhaps prominence
or material things or both.
But what bad quality was developing
in Baruch’s heart that Jehovah saw?
Greed.
And the Insight book defines greed
as “inordinate or rapacious desire.”
The dictionary says it’s “a selfish, . . .
“excessive desire for more of something
(such as money) than is needed.”
So, in effect, Jehovah was telling Baruch,
‘Stop being greedy.’
And in an extended application,
Jehovah tells us the same thing.
Now, echoing Jehovah’s counsel to Baruch
is what Jesus tells us.
If you’ll open up to Luke chapter 12,
and let’s read our theme scripture here.
Luke 12:15
—similar counsel from Jesus—
Luke 12:15:
“Then he [that is Jesus] said to them:
“‘Keep your eyes open and guard [now notice]
“‘against every sort of greed,
“‘because even
when a person has an abundance,
“‘his life does not result
from the things he possesses.’”
Now, what makes it a challenge, though,
for us to “guard against
every sort of greed,” as Jesus counseled?
Well, our three great enemies.
In fact, let’s discuss each of these
and how it makes it a challenge.
Now, first, our imperfect flesh.
At Genesis 8:21, Jehovah said:
“The inclination of the heart of man
is bad from his youth up.”
And one form of badness is greed.
This tendency toward greed
becomes manifest very early.
For example, we see little toddlers
grab things and hold them tightly.
“Mine, mine, mine.”
That greed is starting to manifest, isn’t it?
When people look at a little toddler,
they may say,
“What a cute little boy,”
or “He has his mother’s eyes
and his father’s nose.”
But they never invariably say:
“Look at that little toddler.
What an unselfish little toddler!”
No, it takes a lot of effort
—doesn’t it?—
to teach that little one
to be unselfish like Jehovah.
But now, what about our
second great enemy, Satan?
What was Satan’s downfall?
It was greed.
He allowed a greedy desire for something
that belonged
to Jehovah alone to develop in his heart.
And what was that greed for?
Worship.
And he wants his downfall to be our downfall.
He wants to ensnare us in greed.
So he tries to magnify, intensify,
our wrong tendency to be greedy.
And if you think about it, how was Satan
able to entrap the perfect woman, Eve?
He entrapped her in greed.
He got her to crave, desire,
what belonged to God alone.
In effect, he said to her:
‘Eating of all the trees
of the garden minus one tree
‘is not good enough.
‘You should crave that one tree
that has not been given to you.’
In fact, let me, please, illustrate
how greedy Satan made Adam and Eve
—how greedy they were.
I’d like for you to imagine
that you have guests staying in your home,
and you say, “Now, I really want you
to make yourselves
at home while you’re here.”
You take them into the kitchen;
you open the refrigerator and say:
“There are all kinds of food here
“in the cabinets
—the pantry—
“everything you could imagine
that you would want to eat.
“It’s yours.
Help yourself.
Don’t even ask.”
But then you pull out
one little drawer, and you say:
“Now, I’ve set aside
some items for a later occasion.
“Please, this is very important.
“Do not eat from this one drawer.
“But you’ll find other items just like
“in this drawer
in the pantry and the cabinets.
You’ll have everything you need.”
Now, would that be overly restrictive?
Would that be
an unloving arrangement with your guests?
It’d be very generous, wouldn’t it?
And, in effect, that’s the arrangement
Jehovah made with Adam and Eve.
But now, back to the illustration:
If you came into the kitchen
and you found your guests eating
out of that one drawer
that you had not given them,
you’d be very upset, wouldn’t you?
And you’d probably view it as stealing,
and you likely would put
the thieves out of your house.
So that illustrates
how Jehovah felt and how Jehovah reacted.
But what a protection being content
with what was rightfully hers
would have been to Eve!
But now, what about
our third great enemy—the world?
We are relentlessly surrounded
by Satan’s world and his spirit,
called “the spirit of the world.”
We could say
that Jehovah breathes holy spirit
to influence his people
to act like him and to be unselfish.
But Satan, in effect, exhales
the stinky spirit of the world
that makes people
act like him in being greedy.
And one way Satan’s world
promotes greed for material things
is by relentless advertising.
People are constantly bombarded
with advertisements.
For example, here’s just an example:
They may bring out a shiny, new car;
it has about 12 coats of wax on it.
They have all these spotlights shining on it.
They bring in a camera
from all different angles
and, about this time,
a scantily clothed woman
comes strolling out to that automobile.
And you don’t even notice it, but there’s
soft music playing in the background.
As she opens the door and gets in,
a crescendo is reached
in the background music.
You’re made to feel like,
‘You poor, poor loser
if you don’t have that car.’
They don’t talk about the heavy payments
you’re going to have to make
or how many meetings you’re going to have
to miss to make those payments.
‘You poor loser if you don’t have that car.’
And similar advertising methods
are used very often
in promoting
many other gadgets and material things.
So, obviously, we have to fight hard
against the spirit of the world
so that we don’t allow it
to nurture greed in our hearts.
In fact, if we’re not careful,
our love for Jehovah
could be squeezed out
by love for money
and love for material things.
And if this happens,
rather than
conquering the world as Jesus did,
the world will have conquered us.
Now, it admittedly is a great challenge
to fight these three great enemies and avoid,
as Jesus counseled, “every sort of greed.”
But now, think of that—Jesus indicated
there’s not just one sort
of greed, one kind of greed.
Greed can take on
various faces, or manifestations,
but we’re to guard against all of them.
What would you say is the antidote
that can immunize us
against the poison of greed?
Well, is it not contentment?
For example,
one sort of greed we talked about,
greed for material things
—well, contentment will immunize us
against this terrible form of greed.
We’re familiar with 1 Timothy 6:8:
“So, having food and clothing,
“[and the footnote adds “shelter.”]
we will be content with these things.”
So contentment really protects us.
And, in effect,
that’s what Jehovah was telling Baruch;
he was telling him:
‘You have what you need.
‘Stop storing up great things,
or seeking great things.
Be content with what you have
and do more important things.’
And then he gave a powerful reason
why Baruch should do this.
Jehovah told him at Jeremiah 45:5:
“For I am about to bring
a calamity on all flesh,”
so if “you get the mastery over” this,
“I will grant you your life as a spoil.”
Well, the same applies to us, doesn’t it?
Jehovah is soon going to bring
a calamity on all flesh,
and so we need to be content
with what we really need
and ‘seek first the Kingdom.’
We’re just ‘temporary residents,’ aren’t we?
That’s what 1 Peter 1:17 says.
Now here’s an illustration
about a temporary resident.
I’d like you to imagine
that we rent a venue
for our regional convention.
Now, you may do a few things
to make the stay
more comfortable in that venue.
For example, you may do thorough cleaning;
you might do some touch-up painting;
you might repair
some broken toilets or light fixtures.
But you would never paint and plaster
the entire stadium inside and out.
You wouldn’t rip up the seats
and put all new seating in.
You wouldn’t tear out
the parking lot and put in a new parking lot
because you know
you’re just a temporary resident.
You’re going to vacate
that place after the weekend.
Now, unlike the illustration, we don’t know
exactly when we’re going to vacate,
but we know it’s soon.
So we keep it simple.
We’re just temporary residents.
Another sort of greed
is greed for prominence.
But being content
with how generous Jehovah
has been in giving us so many privileges
will protect us from this greed.
It would’ve protected Korah in Moses’ time.
Another sort of greed
is greedy sexual desire.
If we’re single or married,
being content
with what rightfully belongs to us
will really be a protection.
It would have protected David
from his sin with Bath-sheba.
Or there are other sorts of greed,
such as gluttony and drunkenness.
But the antidote
for all of these is contentment
—contentment with what is rightfully ours
that Jehovah has given to us.
And if we are successful
in guarding against every sort of greed,
then we’ll be on hand
to enjoy the marvelous time
when Jehovah will open his hand
and satisfy every proper
“desire of every living thing.”